[docs] Performance docs tidy up, part 1 (#23963)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/perf_train_gpu_one.mdx

an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
-->

# Methods and tools for efficient training on a single GPU

This guide demonstrates practical techniques that you can use to increase the efficiency of your model's training by 
optimizing memory utilization, speeding up the training, or both. If you have access to a machine with multiple GPUs, 
these approaches are still valid, plus you can leverage additional methods outlined in the [multi-GPU section](perf_train_gpu_many).

When training large models, there are two aspects that should be considered at the same time: 

* Data throughput/training time
* Model performance

Maximizing the throughput (samples/second) leads to lower training cost. This is generally achieved by utilizing the GPU 
as much as possible and thus filling GPU memory to its limit. If the desired batch size exceeds the limits of the GPU memory, 
the memory optimization techniques, such as gradient accumulation, can help.

However, if the preferred batch size fits into memory, there's no reason to apply memory-optimizing techniques because they can 

> slow down the training. Just because one can use a large batch size, does not necessarily mean they should. As part of 

Author: This is from the original doc: "If the desired batch size fits into memory then there is no reason to apply gradient accumulation which will only slow down training. [...] Just because we can does not mean we should use a large batch size."

| Method/tool                                           | Improves training speed | Optimizes memory utilization |
|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------|:-----------------------------|
| [Batch size choice](#batch-size-choice)               | Yes                     | Yes                          |
| [Gradient accumulation](#gradient-accumulation)       | No                      | Yes                          |
| [Gradient checkpointing](#gradient-checkpointing)     | No                      | Yes                          |
| [Mixed precision training](#mixed-precision-training) | Yes                     | (No)                         |
| [Optimizer choice](#optimizer-choice)                 | Yes                     | Yes                          |
| [Data preloading](#data-preloading)                   | Yes                     | No                           |
| [DeepSpeed Zero](#deepspeed-zero)                     | No                      | Yes                          |
| [torch.compile](#using-torchcompile)                                     | Yes                      | No                           |

> Note: a bracket means there may be negligible effects on memory utilization. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip>

The parentheses mean there may be negligible effects on memory utilization.

</Tip>
```

You can combine the above methods to get a cumulative effect. These techniques are available to you whether you are 
training your model with [`Trainer`] or writing a pure PyTorch loop, in which case you can [configure these optimizations 

> with 🤗 Accelerate](#using--accelerate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with 🤗 Accelerate](#using-accelerate).
```

To achieve optimal performance, start by identifying the appropriate batch size. It is recommended to use batch sizes and 
input/output neuron counts that are of size 2^N. Often it's a multiple of 8, but it can be 
higher depending on the hardware being used and the model's dtype.

This summary is derived from [Data Movement Is All You Need: A Case Study on Optimizing Transformers 2020](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00072)
For reference, check out NVIDIA's recommendation for [input/output neuron counts](
https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-fully-connected/index.html#input-features) and 
[batch size](https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-fully-connected/index.html#batch-size) for 
fully connected layers (which are involved in GEMMs (General Matrix Multiplications)).

[Tensor Core Requirements](https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-matrix-multiplication/index.html#requirements-tc) 
define the multiplier based on the dtype and the hardware. For instance, for fp16 data type a multiple of 8 is recommended, unless 
it's an A100 GPU, in which case use multiples of 64.

> ## Anatomy of Model's Memory

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's a good idea to remove completely this aprt of the guide.

Author: @sgugger The main feedback to these parts of the documentation was that it was difficult to find actionable information. It was a large document that was hard to navigate (it is still large, but in my opinion, more actionable).  Less doc is precisely what users wanted. Perhaps, the anatomy of the model can move to the conceptual guides, and we can link it here. As for the benchmarking, here's my reasoning for removing the examples - a) the benchmarks will differ depending on a number of factors, and one example does not guarantee the same results for all scenarios, b) there are links to benchmarks at the end of some sections. Perhaps, instead of this exact example throughout all the doc, we could add a separate doc about benchmarking (how to) so that users could do that on their own. 

Thank you for adding @lvwerra and @stas00, would love to hear their thoughts!

> You can enable gradient accumulation by adding `gradient_accumulation_steps` argument to  [`TrainingArguments`]: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable gradient accumulation by adding the `gradient_accumulation_steps` argument to  [`TrainingArguments`]: 
```

> [further down in this guide](#using--accelerate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[further down in this guide](#using-accelerate).
```

> Note:  While it is advised to max out GPU usage as much as possible, a high number of gradient accumulation steps can 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is advised to max out GPU usage as much as possible, a high number of gradient accumulation steps can 
```

> `per_device_train_batch_size` to 1 and `gradient_accumulation_steps` to 64. Instead, keep the `per_device_train_batch_size=4` 
> and set the `gradient_accumulation_steps=16`. This results in the same effective batch size while making better use of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`per_device_train_batch_size` to 1 and `gradient_accumulation_steps` to 64. Instead, keep `per_device_train_batch_size=4` 
and set `gradient_accumulation_steps=16`. This results in the same effective batch size while making better use of 
```

> To enable gradient checkpointing in the [`Trainer`], pass corresponding a flag to the [`TrainingArguments`]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable gradient checkpointing in the [`Trainer`], pass the corresponding a flag to [`TrainingArguments`]:
```

> Alternatively, use 🤗 Accelerate - find the 🤗 Accelerate example [further in this guide](#using--accelerate). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, use 🤗 Accelerate - find the 🤗 Accelerate example [further in this guide](#using-accelerate). 
```

> Note that while improving memory efficiency, gradient checkpointing slows down training by approximately 20%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip>

While gradient checkpointing may improve memory efficiency, it slows training by approximately 20%.

</Tip>
```

> precision (fp32 (float32)) to represent and process variables. However, not all variables require this high precision 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
precision (fp32 or float32) to represent and process variables. However, not all variables require this high precision 
```

> floating point (fp16 (float16)), we can speed up the computations. Because in this approach some computations are performed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
floating point (fp16 or float16), we can speed up the computations. Because in this approach some computations are performed 
```

> out [NVIDIA Blog](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-ai-training-with-tf32-tensor-cores/)to learn more about 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
out the [NVIDIA Blog](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-ai-training-with-tf32-tensor-cores/) to learn more about 
```

> ### FP16

Reviewer: Maybe just keep this lower-cased since we also use the lower-cased version in the text (same for the bf16 and tf32 sections).

```suggestion
### fp16
```

> The main speed improvement of mixed precision training comes from saving the activations in half precision (fp16 (float16)). 

Author: I suppose I interpreted this sentence from the original doc incorrectly: "The main advantage comes from saving the activations in half (16-bit) precision."

> The main speed improvement of mixed precision training comes from saving the activations in half precision (fp16 (float16)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main speed improvement of mixed precision training comes from saving the activations in half precision (fp16). 
```

> While mixed precision training results in faster computations, it can also lead to more GPU memory (1.5x the original 
> model is on the GPU) being utilized, especially for small batch sizes.
> This is because the model is now present on the GPU in both 16-bit and 32-bit precision (1.5x the original model is on the GPU).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While mixed precision training results in faster computations, it can also lead to more GPU memory being utilized, especially for small batch sizes.
This is because the model is now present on the GPU in both 16-bit and 32-bit precision (1.5x the original model on the GPU).
```

> If you prefer to use 🤗 Accelerate, find the 🤗 Accelerate example [further in this guide](#using--accelerate). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to use 🤗 Accelerate, find the 🤗 Accelerate example [further in this guide](#using-accelerate). 
```

> Note: you need `torch>=1.7` to leverage this feature.

Reviewer: Combining both notes into one callout:

```md
<Tip>

tf32 can't be accessed directly via `tensor.to(dtype=torch.tf32)` because it is an internal CUDA data type. You need `torch>=1.7` to use tf32 data types.

</Tip>
```

> good convergence by storing the rolling average of the previous gradients which, however, adds an additional memory 
> footprint of the order of the number of model parameters. One remedy to this is to use an alternative optimizer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
good convergence by storing the rolling average of the previous gradients; however, it adds an additional memory 
footprint of the order of the number of model parameters. To remedy this, you can use an alternative optimizer. 
```

> [`Trainer`] integrates a variety of optimisers that can be used out of box: `adamw_hf`, `adamw_torch`, `adamw_torch_fused`, 

Reviewer: Align on the spelling of optimizer, either one works for me :)

```suggestion
[`Trainer`] integrates a variety of optimizers that can be used out of box: `adamw_hf`, `adamw_torch`, `adamw_torch_fused`, 
```

> `adamw_apex_fused`, `adamw_anyprecision or adafactor`. More optimizers can be plugged in via a third-party implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`adamw_apex_fused`, `adamw_anyprecision` or `adafactor`. More optimizers can be plugged in via a third-party implementation.
```

)
```

> <Tip>
> Note that in order to use the 8-bit optimizer with an existing pretrained model a change to the embedding layer is needed.
> Read [this issue](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/14819) for more information.
> </Tip>

Reviewer: Adding a blank line after the `<Tip>` to render the link correctly.

```suggestion
<Tip>

To use the 8-bit optimizer with an existing pretrained model, you need to make a change to the embedding layer.
Read [this issue](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/14819) for more information.

</Tip>
```

Finally, pass the custom optimizer as an argument to the `Trainer`:

```py
trainer = Trainer(model=model, args=training_args, train_dataset=ds, optimizers=(adam_bnb_optim, None))
```

Combined with other approaches (gradient accumulation, gradient checkpointing, and mixed precision training), 
you can expect to get about a 3x memory improvement and even slightly higher throughput as using Adafactor. 

> ### `_multi_tensor`

Reviewer: The doc-builder doesn't render code format in the headers

```suggestion
### multi_tensor
```

pytorch-nightly introduced `torch.optim._multi_tensor` which should significantly speed up the optimizers for situations 

> with lots of small feature tensors. It should eventually become the default, but if you want to experiment with it sooner, 
> see: https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/9965

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with lots of small feature tensors. It should eventually become the default, but if you want to experiment with it sooner, take a look at this GitHub [issue](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/9965).
```

## Data preloading

One of the important requirements to reach great training speed is the ability to feed the GPU at the maximum speed it 
can handle. By default, everything happens in the main process, and it might not be able to read the data from disk fast 

> enough, and thus create a bottleneck, leading to GPU under-utilization.

Reviewer: Some type of transition would be nice here.

```suggestion
enough, and thus create a bottleneck, leading to GPU under-utilization. Configure the following arguments to reduce the bottleneck:
```

> - `DataLoader(pin_memory=True, ...)` which ensures that the data gets preloaded into the pinned memory on CPU and typically leads to much faster transfers from CPU to GPU memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DataLoader(pin_memory=True, ...)` - ensures the data gets preloaded into the pinned memory on CPU and typically leads to much faster transfers from CPU to GPU memory.
```

> - `DataLoader(num_workers=4, ...)` - spawn several workers to preload data faster - during training watch the GPU utilization stats and if it's far from 100% experiment with raising the number of workers. Of course, the problem could be elsewhere so a very big number of workers won't necessarily lead to a better performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DataLoader(num_workers=4, ...)` - spawn several workers to preload data faster. During training, watch the GPU utilization stats; if it's far from 100%, experiment with increasing the number of workers. Of course, the problem could be elsewhere, so many workers won't necessarily lead to better performance.
```

> When using [`Trainer`], corresponding [`TrainingArguments`] are: `dataloader_pin_memory` (`True` by default), and `dataloader_num_workers` (defaults to `0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using [`Trainer`], the corresponding [`TrainingArguments`] are: `dataloader_pin_memory` (`True` by default), and `dataloader_num_workers` (defaults to `0`).
```

## DeepSpeed ZeRO

> DeepSpeed is an open-source deep learning optimization library that both 🤗 Transformers and 🤗 Accelerate integrate with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DeepSpeed is an open-source deep learning optimization library that is integrated with 🤗 Transformers and 🤗 Accelerate.
```

It provides a wide range of features and optimizations designed to improve the efficiency and scalability of large-scale 
deep learning training.

If your model fits onto a single GPU and you have enough space to fit a small batch size, you don't need to use DeepSpeed
as it'll only slow things down. However, if the model doesn't fit onto a single GPU or you can't fit a small batch, you can 
leverage DeepSpeed ZeRO + CPU Offload, or NVMe Offload for much larger models. In this case, you need to separately
[install the library](main_classes/deepspeed#installation), then follow one of the guides to create a configuration file 
and launch DeepSpeed: 
 
* For an in-depth guide on DeepSpeed integration with [`Trainer`], review [the corresponding documentation](main_classes/deepspeed), specifically the 

> [section for a single GPU](main_classes/deepspeed#deployment-with-one-gpu). Note that there are some adjustments required to use DeepSpeed in a Notebook, refer to a [corresponding guide](main_classes/deepspeed#deployment-in-notebooks)
> * If you prefer to use 🤗 Accelerate, refer to [🤗 Accelerate DeepSpeed guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/en/usage_guides/deepspeed) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[section for a single GPU](main_classes/deepspeed#deployment-with-one-gpu). Some adjustments are required to use DeepSpeed in a notebook; please take a look at the [corresponding guide](main_classes/deepspeed#deployment-in-notebooks).
* If you prefer to use 🤗 Accelerate, refer to [🤗 Accelerate DeepSpeed guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/en/usage_guides/deepspeed).
```

## Using torch.compile

PyTorch 2.0 introduced a new compile function that doesn't require any modification to existing PyTorch code but can 
optimize your code by adding a single line of code: `model = torch.compile(model)`.

> If using [`Trainer`], you only need `to` pass the `torch_compile` option in the [`TrainingArguments`], e.g.: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using [`Trainer`], you only need `to` pass the `torch_compile` option in the [`TrainingArguments`]: 
```

```python
training_args = TrainingArguments(torch_compile=True, **default_args)
```

`torch.compile` uses Python's frame evaluation API to automatically create a graph from existing PyTorch programs. After 
capturing the graph, different backends can be deployed to lower the graph to an optimized engine. 
You can find more details and benchmarks in [PyTorch documentation](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/).

> `torch.compile` has a growing list of backends, which can be found in [backends.py](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/master/torch/_dynamo/optimizations/backends.py)
> or `torchdynamo.list_backends()` each of which with its optional dependencies.

Reviewer: The link to `backends.py` leads to a 404, and it'd also be nice to add a link to `torchdynamo.list_backends()`

```suggestion
`torch.compile` has a growing list of backends, which can be found in [backends.py](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/master/torch/_dynamo/optimizations/backends.py)
or `torchdynamo.list_backends()`, each with their optional dependencies.
```

Choose which backend to use by specifying it via `torch_compile_backend` in the [`TrainingArguments`].  Some of the most commonly used backends are:

> **Debugging backends**:

Reviewer: It may be easier to read if we throw all this in a table of backend types.
